SEP-1036: URL Mode Elicitation for secure out-of-band interactions (#887)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/specification/draft/client/elicitation.mdx

<Note>

The design of the Elicitation capability may evolve in future protocol versions.

</Note>

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) provides a standardized way for servers to request additional
information from users through the client during interactions. This flow allows clients to
maintain control over user interactions and data sharing while enabling servers to gather
necessary information dynamically.

Elicitation supports two modes:

> - **Form mode** (in-band): Servers can request structured data from users with optional JSON schemas to validate responses

Reviewer: For simplification purposes, I am not sure it's worth calling them "in-band" and "out-of-band" - the modes themselves should be sufficient.

> - **Out-of-band mode**: Servers can direct users to external URLs for sensitive nteractions that must _not_ pass through the MCP client

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Out-of-band mode**: Servers can direct users to external URLs for sensitive interactions that must _not_ pass through the MCP client
```

> - **URL mode** (out-of-band): Servers can direct users to external URLs for sensitive interactions that must _not_ pass through the MCP client

Reviewer: Do we think there is a more generic name for this than URL mode? Maybe something like "Handoff mode"?

For trust & safety and security:

- Servers **MUST NOT** use form mode elicitation to request sensitive information
- Servers **MUST** use URL mode for interactions involving sensitive information, such as credentials
- URLs **MUST NOT** appear in any field of an elicitation request, other than the `url` field in an URL mode request

MCP clients **MUST**:

- Provide UI that makes it clear which server is requesting information
- Respect user privacy and provide clear decline and cancel options
- For form mode, allow users to review and modify their responses before sending
- For URL mode, clearly display the target domain/host and gather user consent before navigation to the target URL

> 

Reviewer 3: - For URL Mode I think the operation associated with the Elicitation MUST also be shown (for example, was it a Tool/Call or a Prompts/List or unsolicited).
-

Reviewer 3: If can I receive multiple elicitations from a Server, I'd say it's a MUST to know which link corresponds to which operation? Otherwise how do I know what I'm eliciting.

>  and in the case of server-initiated elicitation, there is no associated operation

My preference would be to get rid of the server-initiated type entirely, and just use the new Error along with guidance to Client authors on showing a "Complete" or "Abort" dialogue that either 1) retries the tool call or 2) returns the error.

Reviewer 3: It is for security - given two different operations I want the User to know exactly which elicitation was caused by which operation, otherwise I could be following a link for something I don't want to happen. Why would a client not be able to do this - it has had to handle the call? What's the objection to including this? The word correlation wasn't about retrying, it's about having a clear cause and effect for the User as there is nothing stopping these elicitations from overlapping and causing confusion.

For trust & safety and security:

- Servers **MUST NOT** use form mode elicitation to request sensitive information
- Servers **MUST** use url mode for interactions involving sensitive information, such as credentials
- URLs **MUST NOT** appear in any field of an elicitation request, other than the `url` field in an url mode request

> Applications **SHOULD**:

Reviewer: Should this explicitly call out "MCP clients" rather than "applications"?

[initialization](../basic/lifecycle#initialization):

```json
{
  "capabilities": {
    "elicitation": {
      "form": {},
      "url": {}
    }
  }
}
```

Clients declaring the `elicitation` capability **MUST** support at least one mode (`form` or `url`).

Servers **MUST NOT** send elicitation requests with modes that are not supported by the client.

## Protocol Messages

### Elicitation Requests

To request information from a user, servers send an `elicitation/create` request.

All elicitation requests **MUST** include the following parameters:

| Name      | Type   | Options       | Description                                                        |
| --------- | ------ | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `mode`    | string | `form`, `url` | The mode of the elicitation.                                       |
| `message` | string |               | A human-readable message explaining why the interaction is needed. |

The `mode` parameter specifies the type of elicitation:

- `"form"`: In-band structured data collection with optional schema validation. Data is exposed to the client.

> - `"url"`: Out-of-band interaction via URL navigation. Data is **not** exposed to the client.

Reviewer: Technically, you would have some data exposed to the client - the URL. Worth calling that out.

```json
{
  "capabilities": {
    "elicitation": {
      "form": {},

>       "oob": {}

Author: Good call. I think `userAgent` would be the most technically accurate, but I'm wary of introducing the `agent` word since it's very overloaded in the AI world. 🙂 Could do `browser` but it might be too prescriptive.

Your argument that many devs will encounter "out of band/oob" for the first time here resonates. Great point 👍

>       "oob": {}

Reviewer 2: Word ideas: `navigation`.

>       "oob": {}

Author: @ggoodman @wdawson After sleeping on it, I think `url` might be the simplest and best option here:
1. Reflects that `mode: url` is tightly coupled to a `url` field, which IMO is okay. Leaves the door open in the future for other modes that have a different mechanism.
2. Less jargon and easier for developers to grok. "How does elicitation work? There is form mode and URL mode. For form mode you need a form schema, and for URL mode you need a URL."

    }
  }
}
```

Clients declaring the `elicitation` capability **MUST** support at least one mode (`form` or `oob`).

Servers **MUST NOT** send elicitation requests with modes that are not supported by the client.

## Protocol Messages

### Elicitation Requests

To request information from a user, servers send an `elicitation/create` request.

All elicitation requests **MUST** include the following parameters:

| Name      | Type   | Options       | Description                                                        |
| --------- | ------ | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `mode`    | string | `form`, `oob` | The mode of the elicitation.                                       |
| `message` | string |               | A human-readable message explaining why the interaction is needed. |

The `mode` parameter specifies the type of elicitation:

- `"form"`: In-band structured data collection with optional schema validation. Data is exposed to the client.
- `"oob"`: Out-of-band interaction via URL navigation. Data is **not** exposed to the client.

> ### Form Elicitation Requests

Author: Note to reviewers: This section is not new, but re-organized so that we can clearly describe form elicitation here, and out-of-band elicitation in the next sub-section.

with primitive properties only.

The schema is restricted to these primitive types:

1. **String Schema**

   ```json
   {
     "type": "string",
     "title": "Display Name",
     "description": "Description text",
     "minLength": 3,
     "maxLength": 50,
     "pattern": "^[A-Za-z]+$",
     "format": "email"
   }
   ```

   Supported formats: `email`, `uri`, `date`, `date-time`

2. **Number Schema**

   ```json
   {
     "type": "number", // or "integer"
     "title": "Display Name",
     "description": "Description text",
     "minimum": 0,
     "maximum": 100
   }
   ```

3. **Boolean Schema**

   ```json
   {
     "type": "boolean",
     "title": "Display Name",
     "description": "Description text",
     "default": false
   }
   ```

4. **Enum Schema**
   ```json
   {
     "type": "string",
     "title": "Display Name",
     "description": "Description text",
     "enum": ["option1", "option2", "option3"],
     "enumNames": ["Option 1", "Option 2", "Option 3"]
   }
   ```

Clients can use this schema to:

1. Generate appropriate input forms
2. Validate user input before sending
3. Provide better guidance to users

> Note that complex nested structures, arrays of objects, and other advanced JSON Schema features are intentionally not supported to simplify client implementation.

Reviewer 4: Oh, so it is - yeah, worth spinning out to another PR, then. I'll put something out in a bit since I brought it up.

The server **MUST** respond with an [error](#error-handling) if the client sends an `elicitation/track` request containing an `elicitationId` that is not known or does not belong to the client.

After the client has requested progress updates via an `elicitation/track` request, the server **MAY** send [progress notifications](../basic/utilities/progress) to the client.

The server **SHOULD** send a `elicitation/track` response to the client once the elicitation is complete.

#### Example

**Progress Tracking Request:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 4,
  "method": "elicitation/track",
  "params": {
    "_meta": {
      "progressToken": "abc123"
    },
    "elicitationId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
  }
}
```

**Progress Tracking Notification:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "notifications/progress",
  "params": {
    "progressToken": "abc123",
    "progress": 42,
    "message": "Consent pending..."
  }
}
```

**Progress Tracking Response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 4,
  "result": {
    "status": "complete"
  }
}
```

### Elicitation Required Error

> When another request cannot be processed until an elicitation is completed, the server **SHOULD** return an [ElicitationRequired error](#error-handling) (code `-32000`) to indicate to the client that an elicitation is required.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a request cannot be processed or suspended until an elicitation is completed, the server **MAY** return an [ElicitationRequired error](#error-handling) (code `-32000`) to indicate to the client that an elicitation is required.
```

What does "another" mean in "another request"? Shouldn't it just be "a request"?

And does the `**SHOULD**` here imply this is preferred over the `elicitation/create` request? I think `MAY` is better, because if a server can send a request rather than an error response, it could keep the operation ongoing and return a successful response immediately when the elicitation completes without the client having to optimistically retry or do any tracking.

Author: Agreed, these are good updates.

}
```

### Out-of-Band Elicitation Requests

Out-of-band elicitation enables servers to direct users to external URLs for interactions that must not pass through the MCP client. This is essential for auth flows, payment processing, and other sensitive or secure operations.

<Note>
  **Important**: Out-of-band elicitation is *not* for re-authorizing the MCP
  client's access to the MCP server (that is covered by [MCP
  authorization](../basic/authorization)). It's specifically for scenarios where
  the MCP server needs to obtain sensitive information, or authorization for

>   third-party services on behalf of the user. The MCP client's authorization
>   (bearer) token remains unchanged throughout this process.
> </Note>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  third-party services on behalf of the user. The MCP client's authorization
  (bearer) token remains unchanged throughout this process. Out-of-band
  elicitation is an interaction between the user and the server where the
  client's only role is to facilitate the communication.
</Note>
```
Honestly don't know if this actually makes things better. Just trying to say it in other words for folks who might not get that there are (at least) two distinct auth relationships going on here.

Reviewer 6: Good points. I like "facilitate," but we saw lots of confusion with that with 475. People seemed to think that implied the client needed to do more than was explained in the spec.

I'll rework this a bit to clarify the responsibilities of the client. Thanks for the nudge!

**Request:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 3,
  "method": "elicitation/create",
  "params": {
    "mode": "oob",
    "elicitationId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
    "url": "https://mcp.example.com/ui/set_api_key",
    "message": "Please provide your API key to continue."
  }
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 3,
  "result": {
    "action": "accept"
  }
}
```

The response with `action: "accept"` indicates that the user has consented to the
interaction. It does not mean that the interaction is complete. The interaction occurs out
of band and the client is not aware of the outcome, unless the client requests progress updates.

### Progress Tracking

The client **MAY** request progress updates from the server by sending an `elicitation/track` request with a [progress token](/specification/draft/basic/utilities/progress#progress-token). This is particularly useful in out-of-band mode, because the client is not involved in the interaction.

The client **MUST** include an `elicitationId` in the request to identify which elicitation to send progress updates for. The client **SHOULD** include a `progressToken` in the request's `_meta` field.

> The server **MUST** ignore any `elicitation/track` requests containing an `elicitationId` that is not known or does not belong to the client.

Reviewer 7: "ignore" is not something that is valid to do, it will need to response somehow (e.g. with an error)

The server **MAY** send a `notifications/progress` notification to the client with the progress token and the progress status.

> The server **SHOULD** send a `elicitation/track` response to the client once the elicitation is complete.

Reviewer 2: Leveraging the progress tracking here adds some complexity to for servers looking to be strictly 'correct'. The server author could rightfully notice that the `elicitation/track` message could arrive for an already-completed elicitation. So the server author has to decide:

1. Do I try to close this little race window by saving EVERY elicitation outcome?
2. How long do I save these outcomes?
3. When is a progress request too old?

Maybe we should be giving some guidance on these topics. I've been trying to think if there's an ergonomic way to totally close any race window (ie: asking for subscription in `accept` response) but what I'm coming up with only shrinks the window without eliminating it.

Reviewer 6: Totally agree that this could be more ergonomic. We were looking at doing something like [resource subscriptions](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/resources#subscriptions) (though that's built on client requests too. 

In the end, for this PR, we decided to leverage the existing progress capability. Assuming this PR merges, I'd like to find a way to make this more ergonomic with you @ggoodman , if you're interested. I think there could be other places in MCP to benefit. 

We purposefully made progress optional here so that any future mechanisms could be adopted alongside the progress approach.

Reviewer 2: 👍🏼 don't want to block this landing on this subject. I think it's really nice to see this latest take on the proposal have a "transactional" story built in. We can refine the ergonomics in the future.

Happy to collaborate on a follow-up.

Author: Thanks for the good feedback @ggoodman. Following up here - in the final draft (the latest commits to this PR), we dropped `elicitation/track` entirely in favor of a simple server->client [notification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic#notifications).

> The server **SHOULD** send a `elicitation/track` response to the client once the elicitation is complete.

Reviewer 7: I think this is the first time we have an MCP request that could take a long time (minutes+) to complete. This may be a concern for implementors who use Streamable HTTP and are subject to timeouts are various network layers. May consider recommending https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/899 as a way to handle them.

Reviewer 6: tools/call requests can take minutes, no?

  }
}
```

### Elicitation Required Error

When another request cannot be processed until an elicitation is completed, the server **SHOULD** return an [ElicitationRequired error](/docs/concepts/architecture#error-handling) (code `-32604`) to indicate to the client that an elicitation is required.

The error **MUST** include a list of elicitations that are required to complete before the original can be retried.

Any elicitations returned in the error **MUST** be out-of-band mode elicitations and have an `elicitationId` property.
Servers that want elicit data from the user via form mode **SHOULD** make a separate elicitation request for each form mode elicitation.

**Error Response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 2,
  "error": {
    "code": -32604, // ELICITATION_REQUIRED
    "message": "This request requires more information.",
    "data": {
      "elicitations": [
        {
          "mode": "oob",
          "elicitionId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
          "url": "https://oauth.example.com/authorize?client_id=abc123&response_type=code&...",
          "message": "Authorization is required to access your Example Co files."
        }

>       ]

Author: That was for you! 🙂

    }
  }
}
```

## Message Flow

### Form Mode Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Client
    participant Server

    Note over Server: Server initiates elicitation
    Server->>Client: elicitation/create (mode: form)

    Note over User,Client: Present elicitation UI
    User-->>Client: Provide requested information

    Note over Server,Client: Complete request
    Client->>Server: Return user response

    Note over Server: Continue processing with new information
```

### Out-of-Band Mode Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant UserAgent as User Agent (Browser)
    participant User
    participant Client
    participant Server

    Note over Server: Server initiates elicitation
    Server->>Client: elicitation/create (mode: oob)

    Client->>User: Present consent to open URL
    User-->>Client: Provide consent

    Client->>UserAgent: Open URL
    Client->>Server: Accept response

>     Client-->>Server: elicitation/track request (optional)

Reviewer 2: There's an opportunity to combine these. I recognize that there's value in leaning into the concept of general progress tracking but at the same time, there MUST be an accept response so why not allow the tracking to optionally piggy back on that?

    Note over User,UserAgent: User interaction
    Server-->>Client: notifications/progress (optional)
    UserAgent-->>Server: Interaction complete
    Server-->>Client: elicitation/track response (optional)

    Note over Server: Continue processing with new information
```

### Out-of-Band Mode With Elicitation Required Error Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant UserAgent as User Agent (Browser)
    participant User
    participant Client
    participant Server

    Client->>Server: tools/call

    Note over Server: Server needs authorization
    Server->>Client: ElicitationRequired error
    Note over Client: Client notes the original request can be retried after elicitation

    Client->>User: Present consent to open URL
    User-->>Client: Provide consent

    Client->>UserAgent: Open URL
    Client->>Server: Accept response

>     Client-->>Server: elicitation/track request (optional)

Reviewer 2: Same comment about making the track request an optional part of the response.

}
```

### URL Elicitation Requests

URL elicitation enables servers to direct users to external URLs for out-of-band interactions that must not pass through the MCP client. This is essential for auth flows, payment processing, and other sensitive or secure operations.

<Note>

>   **Important**: URL elicitation is *not* for authorizing the MCP client's

Reviewer: Let's make sure that we use uniform terminology. If it's "URL mode elicitations," it would make it clear that it's about the mode and not just requesting a URL through elicitations.

  access to the MCP server (that's handled by [MCP
  authorization](../basic/authorization)). Instead, it's used when the MCP
  server needs to obtain sensitive information or third-party authorization on
  behalf of the user. The MCP client's bearer token remains unchanged. The
  client's only responsibility is to provide the user with context about the
  elicitation URL the server wants them to open.
</Note>

URL elicitation requests **MUST** specify `mode: "url"` and include these parameters:

| Name            | Type   | Description                               |
| --------------- | ------ | ----------------------------------------- |
| `url`           | string | The URL that the user should navigate to. |
| `elicitationId` | string | A unique identifier for the elicitation.  |

> The `url` parameter **MUST** contain a valid URL. The `message` parameter **MUST NOT** contain a URL.

Reviewer: We should mention _what kind_ of URL is valid here. Are these just HTTPS URIs? Can one use local URI schemes (e.g., `appx://`)? My initial sentiment is that we should restrict to HTTPS URIs, but maybe there are scenarios where local apps could be invoked (e.g., auth brokers)?

Author: HTTPS only is my initial sentiment as well (it can always be widened later, but narrowing later is hard).
@chhamilton and I discussed app-specific redirects in detail above.

The only open question in my mind is whether HTTP should be allowed (while HTTPS is still preferred) for local development/testing and stdio servers.

  "params": {
    "_meta": {
      "progressToken": "abc123"
    },
    "elicitationId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
  }
}
```

**Progress Tracking Notification:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "notifications/progress",
  "params": {
    "progressToken": "abc123",
    "progress": 42,
    "message": "Consent pending..."
  }
}
```

**Progress Tracking Response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 4,
  "result": {
    "status": "complete"
  }
}
```

### Elicitation Required Error

When another request cannot be processed until an elicitation is completed, the server **SHOULD** return an [ElicitationRequired error](#error-handling) (code `-32604`) to indicate to the client that an elicitation is required.

The error **MUST** include a list of elicitations that are required to complete before the original can be retried.

Any elicitations returned in the error **MUST** be URL mode elicitations and have an `elicitationId` property.
Servers that want elicit data from the user via form mode **SHOULD** make a separate elicitation request for each form mode elicitation.

**Error Response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 2,
  "error": {

>     "code": -32604, // ELICITATION_REQUIRED

Reviewer 8: I think that's the right thing to do, should be a safer bet than errors in the `-326xx` range.

The `url` parameter **MUST** contain a valid URL. The `message` parameter **MUST NOT** contain a URL.

#### Example: Request Sensitive Data

This example shows a URL mode elicitation request directing the user to a secure URL where they can provide sensitive information (an API key, for example).
The same request could direct the user into an OAuth authorization flow, or a payment flow. The only difference is the URL and the message.

**Request:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 3,
  "method": "elicitation/create",
  "params": {
    "mode": "url",
    "elicitationId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
    "url": "https://mcp.example.com/ui/set_api_key",
    "message": "Please provide your API key to continue."
  }
}
```

**Response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 3,
  "result": {
    "action": "accept"
  }
}
```

The response with `action: "accept"` indicates that the user has consented to the
interaction. It does not mean that the interaction is complete. The interaction occurs out
of band and the client is not aware of the outcome until and unless the server sends a notification indicating completion.

### Completion Notifications for URL Mode Elicitation

> Servers **SHOULD** send a `notifications/elicitation/url/complete` notification when an

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Servers **SHOULD** send a `notifications/elicitation/complete` notification when an
```
nit: does it need to have `url` in it?  if it has the ID the receiver should know what type it is.

Author: Thanks @pcarleton, done!

Servers should handle each state appropriately:

- **Accept**: Process the submitted data or proceed with the interaction
- **Decline**: Handle explicit rejection (e.g., offer alternatives)
- **Cancel**: Handle dismissal (e.g., prompt again later)

## Implementation Considerations

### Statefulness

Most practical uses of elicitation require that the server maintain state about users:

- Whether required information has been collected (e.g., the user's display name via form elicitation)
- Status of resource access (e.g., API keys or a payment flow via out-of-band elicitation)

Servers implementing elicitation **MUST** securely associate this state with individual users following the guidelines in the [security best practices](../basic/security_best_practices) document. Specifically:

- State **MUST NOT** be associated with session IDs alone

> - User identification **MUST** be derived from authenticated tokens

Reviewer 7: As mentioned below, stdio servers don't have authentication tokens of the user. They could require _an_ authentication who knows if that's actually the user of the MCP client.

Author: Thanks for pointing out stdio. There are a number of places in the spec that will need to be updated for stdio if we want to support that.

4. The server stores credentials securely, bound to the user's identity
5. Subsequent MCP requests use these stored credentials for API access

This approach ensures that sensitive credentials never pass through the MCP client or any intermediate MCP servers, reducing the risk of exposure through client-side logging or other attack vectors.

### Out-of-Band Elicitation for OAuth Flows

Out-of-band elicitation enables a pattern where MCP servers act as OAuth clients to third-party resource servers.
The "downstream authorization" enabled by out-of-band elicitation is fundamentally separate from [MCP authorization](../basic/authorization).

<Note>
  This distinction is critical to understand. Out-of-band elicitation is *not*
  about authorizing (or re-authorizing) the MCP client to access the MCP server.
  It *can* be used to enable the MCP server to access third-party resources or
  APIs on behalf of the user, without exposing sensitive credentials or tokens
  to the MCP client.
</Note>

#### Understanding the Distinction

- **MCP Authorization**: Required OAuth flow between the MCP client and MCP server (covered in the [authorization specification](../basic/authorization))

> - **Downstream Authorization**: Optional OAuth flow between the MCP server and a third-party resource server, initiated via out-of-band elicitation

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- **Downstream Authorization**: Optional authorization between the MCP server and a third-party resource server, initiated via out-of-band elicitation
```

It sounds like one of the use cases here is obtaining API keys (like GitHub PAT) so the authorization between the MCP server and the RS is not always OAuth.

    3AS->>UserAgent: redirect to MCP Server's redirect_uri
    UserAgent->>Server: load redirect_uri page
    Note over Server: Confirm: redirect_uri belongs to MCP Server
    Note over Server: Confirm: elicitation matches user session<br>Confirm: user is logged into MCP Server or MCP AS
    Server->>3AS: Exchange authorization code for  OAuth tokens
    3AS->>Server: Grants tokens
    Note over Server: Bind tokens to MCP user identity
    Server-->>Client: elicitation/track response (optional)
    Client->>Server: Retry tools/call
    Note over Server: Retrieve token bound to user identity
    Server->>3RS: Call 3rd-party API
```

This pattern maintains clear security boundaries while enabling rich integrations with third-party services that require user authorization.

## Security Considerations

1. Clients **MUST** provide clear indication of which server is requesting information
2. Clients **SHOULD** implement user approval controls
3. Clients **SHOULD** allow users to reject elicitation requests at any time
4. Clients **SHOULD** implement rate limiting
5. Clients **SHOULD** present elicitation requests in a way that makes it clear what information is being requested and why

> 6. Servers **MUST** bind elicitation requests to the user's identity

Reviewer 10: This is definitely the right thing to do but do we need to spell out what this might mean for 2 different clients using the same user identity with the same server? What if one client supports `ood` and triggers the elicitation, then the other client that doesn't support it calls the MCP server? Is that just naturally handled by the capabilities for the client during initialization?

Reviewer 6: I think I understand your question, but let me know if this doesn't answer @joshcanhelp. I'm assuming http-streamable transport that is authorized since we're talking about user identity. 

Because a different client is connecting, there will be a different MCP session, different capabilities negotiated, different access tokens, etc. The subject claim (i.e. the "user identity") might be the same across both of those connections, and it's up to the server to decide whether to leverage information it gained about a subject (user) from a different client or not. This is not specific to MCP and is a common pattern in many applications to allow different capabilities across clients, but share data. You can imagine that your bank's mobile app might let you see existing mortgages but not start a new application—you need to use the website for that.

TL;DR I don't think we need to worry about details here in MCP.

Reviewer 10: > different capabilities negotiated

I think that's the key here. If the client doesn't have the capability then the elicitation doesn't reach the user that way. The server still needs the information but there's nothing to be done about it. 

Thanks for walking that through 👍

### Safe URL Handling

Clients implementing out-of-band elicitation **MUST** handle URLs carefully to prevent users from unknowingly clicking malicious links.

> 1. Servers **MUST NOT** include URLs in any message or schema fields as part of a form elicitation request.

Reviewer 7: Servers linking to documentation on how to use parameters is a common case that is pretty benign. Clients just need to present this appropriately to users as they would any other untrusteed URL.

Author: I see what you mean. The main thing I want to separate here is: the client MUST implement strict consent checks around the OOB URL.

The question is, do we want to open the door to showing any URLs that do not have that consent check in place?

Reviewer 7: We cannot reasonably prevent it, a server who wants to phish with a URL is in the field is going to phish no matter what the spec says. I think we should just have guidance for clients to display the URL clearly and obtain consent as we do for the OOB URL itself.

Author: > a server who wants to phish with a URL is in the field is going to phish no matter what the spec says

This is actually my exact reasoning for being strict here: we cannot rule out a malicious server sending a URL no matter what the spec says. But by being strict here, the _client_ implementations can better defend against it.

### Identifying the User

Servers **MUST NOT** rely on client-provided user identification, as this can be forged.
Instead, servers **SHOULD** follow [security best practices](/specification/draft/basic/security_best_practices).

Non-normative examples:

- Incorrect: Treat user input like "I am joe@example.com" as authoritative
- Correct: Rely on the [MCP authorization server](/specification/draft/basic/authorization) to identify the user

### Form Mode Security

1. Servers **MUST NOT** request sensitive information (passwords, API keys, etc.) via form mode
2. Clients **SHOULD** validate all responses against the provided schema
3. Servers **SHOULD** validate received data matches the requested schema

### Out-of-Band Mode Security

Clients **MUST NOT** open a user agent (e.g. browser) without explicit consent from the user

#### Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)

Since clients facilitate the opening of URLs provided by servers, they **MUST** implement SSRF protections, including:

> - Requiring the `https://` scheme for all out-of-band URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

Reviewer 11: Eh, actually deeplinks are applicable to many other parts of the protocol (incl. regular OAuth). out of scope for this pr.

> - Requiring the `https://` scheme for all out-of-band URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

Reviewer 6: Yeah, as this was intended to get some direct channel with the (streamable-http) MCP server, we figured `http(s)` would be good enough here. If the server wanted to subsequently deep link to a mobile app, it could do so via a redirect. 

My main concern here is requiring https. I know many people want `http` while developing. Not sure how/if to relax that in the spec. Secure by default is definitely a goal here.

> - Requiring the `https://` scheme for all out-of-band URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

Reviewer 2: The only place that this can be enforced is in the client which is also burdened with the responsibility to get consent from the user to perform the navigation.

Since the client is already in this position, and is the only place where enforcement of the url scheme is possible, shouldn't it be a recommendation?

Or, in other words, what value is the spec adding by _requiring_ https?

> - Requiring the `https://` scheme for all out-of-band URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

Reviewer 7: https is not a requirement that an stdio server is likely to be able to meet.

> - Requiring the `https://` scheme for all out-of-band URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

Reviewer 6: For the spec, maybe we can change to SHOULD use https and _strongly_ recommend https for non-development servers.

👍 to support 
comment with better ideas?

> - Blocking requests to internal IP ranges (e.g., `127.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.0/8`, etc.)

Reviewer 7: stdio servers eliciting OOB on localhost servers is going to be super common

Reviewer 7: Any scenario where they want a rich UI or interaction versus the simple `form` based Elicitation. Random creative example: I have an image editor MCP and want to give the user the option to pop up a rich image editor GUI before I upload the new design version to the cloud.

- Clearly rendering or distinguishing Unicode characters (e.g. punycode URLs) to avoid "look-alike" misdirections
- Clearly communicating the destination server and target URL to the user when asking for consent

Further recommendations can be found in the OWASP [SSRF Prevention Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Server_Side_Request_Forgery_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html).

#### Phishing

> Out-of-band elicitation returns a URL that an attacker can use to send to a victim. The MCP Server **MUST** verify the identity of the user who opens the URL before accepting information.

Reviewer 11: > On that redirect uri, the MCP server would verify the identity.

Yeah now that you mention it forcing the first URL to be "on the MCP server" doesn't actually solve the core issue - how does the MCP server verify the identity of the user who opens the URL? 

I believe there are two ways for `mcp.acme.com` to verify the identity of the user. Holler if there are more:

1. `mcp.acme.com` is an identity provider itself, and can verify the session token it issued to the device previously (or ask the user to log in again if the session is expired or not found).
2. `mcp.acme.com` is a relying party, and can leverage the existing 1P AS (`idp.acme.com`) to learn the identity of the user via a standard OAuth login. This means `mcp.acme.com` functions both as an OAuth Resource Server (during regular MCP operation) and as an OAuth Client (during elicitation).

Regular OAuth resource servers cannot verify the user agent's identity directly today, because the access token being used is stored in the MCP Client, not in the browser.

------

In both cases, it is probably better UX for the MCP server to make sure it can identify the user before redirecting to a third party. That would reduce the risk of an unwanted or rejected elicitation callback later on. But that is a UX consideration instead of a security consideration.

> Out-of-band elicitation returns a URL that an attacker can use to send to a victim. The MCP Server **MUST** verify the identity of the user who opens the URL before accepting information.

Reviewer 12: > I believe there are two ways for `mcp.acme.com` to verify the identity of the user. Holler if there are more:
> 1. `mcp.acme.com` is an identity provider itself, and can verify the session token it issued to the device previously (or ask the user to log in again if the session is expired or not found).
> 2. `mcp.acme.com` is a relying party, and can leverage the existing 1P AS (`idp.acme.com`) to learn the identity of the user via a standard OAuth login. This means `mcp.acme.com` functions both as an OAuth Resource Server (during regular MCP operation) and as an OAuth Client (during elicitation).

3. Based on the second point, if the MCP client is using a 3P AS (`accounts.google.com` or `tenant.auth0.com`), I guess the MCP Server (`mcp.acme.com`) could also act as a relying party and leverage the existing 3P AS to identify the user via standard OAuth login? This would likely be more complex though, requiring the MCP Server to first register as an OAuth client with the 3P AS (potentially streamlined by running the MCP authorization spec in browser).

> Typically identity verification is done by leveraging the [MCP authorization server](/specification/draft/basic/authorization) to identify the user, through a session cookie or equivalent in the browser.

Reviewer 7: OAuth is definitely a route, but a simple alternative for servers to implement may be to include a secret, random string in a URL fragment or query parameter. OAuth checks only work for HTTP servers.

Author: The problem with that approach is that the URL becomes a pre-authenticated URL or "magic link", which does not actually prevent the kind of phishing attack discussed here.

Typically identity verification is done by leveraging the [MCP authorization server](../basic/authorization) to identify the user, through a session cookie or equivalent in the browser.

For example, url elicitation may be used to perform OAuth flows where the server acts as an OAuth client of another resource server. Without proper mitigation, the following phishing attack is possible:

1. A malicious user (Alice) connected to a benign server triggers an elicitation request
2. The benign server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client of a third-party authorization server
3. Alice's client displays the URL and asks for consent
4. Instead of clicking on the link, Alice tricks a victim user (Bob) of the same benign server into clicking it
5. Bob opens the link and completes the authorization, thinking they are authorizing their own connection to the benign server
6. The benign server receives a callback/redirect form the third-party authorization server, and assumes it's Alice's request
7. The tokens for the third-party server are bound to Alice's session and identity, instead of Bob's, resulting in an account takeover

> To prevent this attack, the server **MUST** check the identity of the user (step 6 in the above example), and confirm that the user who is completing the authorization is the same user who initiated the elicitation request.

Reviewer 6: > Under this proposal, the OAuth access token received via MCP authorization spec now would function more like an id_token

That's actually not what we're proposing here; we're _not_ saying that OAuth or the access token must be the mechanism for user authentication. It's up to the server to determine the best mechanism for verifying user identity. 

In OAuth (not OIDC), the AS typically, but not always, has a means of authenticating a user before granting a token. I am not aware of any production OAuth AS that does not require some form of user authentication before granting an access token. Further, the RS typically has a mechanism to determine who that user is. It _could_ be an id_token from OIDC, but it could just as easily be a session cookie that the AS set for it to read, or some other mechanism on a backchannel. The key thing here is that we can't know how this happens and cannot prescribe the details because we don't control those systems. The requirement is that the MCP server must verify the user identity. That's it.

We strive to strike a balance in this document, recommending various approaches to achieve clarity without implying a specific way that things MUST happen. 

> should downstream tokens retrieved via this spec be valid only for a specific MCP Session (i.e., tied to the token stored at a particular MCP client, received via MCP authorization spec), or valid for a specific end-user across MCP sessions (i.e., tied to the identify of the user who connected to the MCP Server)?

This is up to the server to decide. I can see valid use cases for both, and additional security concerns that should be considered if those tokens persist. We considered calling this out more explicitly, and maybe we should.

> To prevent this attack, the server **MUST** check the identity of the user (step 6 in the above example), and confirm that the user who is completing the authorization is the same user who initiated the elicitation request.

Reviewer 13: > We strive to strike a balance in this document, recommending various approaches to achieve clarity without implying a specific way that things MUST happen.

Although it makes sense not mentioning directly due to the reason ^^, at least providing a few of ways (e.g. id token can be used to verify the identity) as an example would clarify how "mcp server must verify the identity" can be achieved by mcp server maintainers.

3. **The user MUST authorize the MCP server directly**: The interaction happens outside the MCP protocol, without involving the MCP client
4. **The MCP server is responsible for tokens**: The MCP server is responsible for storing and managing the third-party tokens obtained through the URL mode elicitation (in other words, the MCP server must be stateful).

Credentials obtained via URL mode elicitation are distinct from the MCP server credentials used by the MCP client. The MCP server **MUST NOT** transmit credentials obtained through URL mode elicitation to the MCP client.

<Note>
  For additional background, refer to the [token passthrough
  section](../basic/security_best_practices#token-passthrough) of the Security
  Best Practices document to understand why MCP servers cannot act as
  pass-through proxies.
</Note>

#### Implementation Pattern

When implementing external authorization via URL mode elicitation:

1. The MCP server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client to the third-party service

> 2. The server creates a URL mode elicitation request with this URL

Reviewer 2: The wording should imply that this is only recommended in the context of an MCP Session and that the proof key should be persisted in 'session storage'. The callback handler needs to be able to recover the implied session to recover the proof key. The `state` can then be a `jose` container that references the `session_id` in a tamper-proof, verifiable way.

4. The server stores credentials securely, bound to the user's identity
5. Subsequent MCP requests use these stored credentials for API access

This approach ensures that sensitive credentials never pass through the MCP client or any intermediate MCP servers, reducing the risk of exposure through client-side logging or other attack vectors.

### URL Mode Elicitation for OAuth Flows

URL mode elicitation enables a pattern where MCP servers act as OAuth clients to third-party resource servers.
Authorization with downstream APIs enabled by URL mode elicitation is separate from [MCP authorization](../basic/authorization). MCP servers **MUST NOT** rely on URL mode elicitation to authorize users for themselves.

#### Understanding the Distinction

- **MCP Authorization**: Required OAuth flow between the MCP client and MCP server (covered in the [authorization specification](../basic/authorization))
- **Downstream Authorization**: Optional authorization between the MCP server and a third-party resource server, initiated via URL mode elicitation

In downstream authorization, the server acts as both:

- An OAuth resource server (to the MCP client)

> - An OAuth client (to the third-party resource server)

Reviewer 6: Agreed that it will need to have a stateful store for its tokens. Added a point about it being stateful.

> - An OAuth client (to the third-party resource server)

Reviewer 14: to confirm, this means that the MCP Server can potentially be storing multiple access tokens for the same user for the same 3rd Party Authorization server for different MCP clients?

> - An OAuth client (to the third-party resource server)

Reviewer 14: This becomes a grey area and a easy escalation of privileges across the client if its not outlined properly. From authorization perspective the user gave consent to the MCP server in 3rd party flows, so a default MCP server implementation to use the same access token would be theoretically correct. On surface it may seem that MCP client is just another actor like browser, however compared to a browser which would not take any action without the user input, the MCP client may very well make use of access token without user input or presence. This itself is not part of conventional OAuth flows. IMO, binding the access token to MCP Client and user namespace as default would be safe choice to add in the spec itself.

> - An OAuth client (to the third-party resource server)

Reviewer 6: @sandeepdhankhar

Totally hear you. But I don't think we can make it a proper MUST as there are a lot of scenarios to consider. After much back and forth with a lot of parties I think we landed at the necessary enforcement of verifying the user's identity properly across clients and sessions. If a server wishes to bind even more context, it may do so. 

I'm hopeful that the auth profiles working group can help to distinguish these scenarios and provide more specific guidance and constraints in the MCP auth as well as in this flow with url elicitation. I'm in that working group so I will be pushing it as we get moving.

  Best Practices document to understand why MCP servers cannot act as
  pass-through proxies.
</Note>

#### Implementation Pattern

When implementing downstream authorization via URL mode elicitation:

1. The MCP server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client to the third-party service
2. The server creates a URL mode elicitation request with this URL
3. The user completes the OAuth flow directly with the third-party authorization server
4. The third-party authorization server redirects back to the MCP server
5. The MCP server securely stores the third-party tokens, bound to the user's identity
6. Future MCP requests can leverage these stored tokens for API access to the third-party resource server

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant UserAgent as User Agent (Browser)
    participant 3AS as 3rd Party AS
    participant 3RS as 3rd Party RS
    participant Client as MCP Client
    participant Server as MCP Server

    Client->>Server: tools/call
    Note over Server: Needs 3rd-party authorization for user
    Note over Server: Store state (which user this auth flow is for)

>     Server->>Client: ElicitationRequired error<br> (mode: "url", url: "example.com/authorize?...")

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
    Server->>Client: ElicitationRequired error<br> (mode: "url", url: "https://{MCP_SERVER_URL}/connect/example")
```

    Note over Client: Client notes the tools/call request can be retried later
    Client->>User: Present consent to open URL
    User->>Client: Provide consent
    Client->>UserAgent: Open URL
    Client->>Server: Accept response
    Client-->>Server: elicitation/track request (optional)

>     UserAgent->>3AS: Load authorize route

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
    Note over Server,User: Server here must verify the user that initiated the elicitation is the authenticated user
    Server->>UserAgent: Redirect to `https://example.com/authorize?...`
    UserAgent->>3AS: Load authorize route
```

Reviewer 6: Modified this diagram to communicate the new pattern

## Error Handling

Servers **MUST** return standard JSON-RPC errors for common failure cases:

- Unknown `elicitationId` in an `elicitation/track` request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- An `elicitationId` belonging to a different client in an `elicitation/track` request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- When a request cannot be processed until an elicitation is completed: `-32000` (ElicitationRequired)

Clients **MUST** return standard JSON-RPC errors for common failure cases:

- Server sends an `elicitation/create` request with a mode not declared in client capabilities: `-32602` (Invalid params)

## Security Considerations

1. Clients **MUST** provide clear indication of which server is requesting information
2. Clients **SHOULD** implement user approval controls
3. Clients **SHOULD** allow users to decline elicitation requests at any time
4. Clients **SHOULD** implement rate limiting
5. Clients **SHOULD** present elicitation requests in a way that makes it clear what information is being requested and why
6. Servers **MUST** bind elicitation requests to the user's identity

### Safe URL Handling

> Clients implementing URL mode elicitation **MUST** handle URLs carefully to prevent users from unknowingly clicking malicious links.

Reviewer 6: Consolidated these sections.

- Correct: Rely on [authorization](../basic/authorization) to identify the user

### Form Mode Security

1. Servers **MUST NOT** request sensitive information (passwords, API keys, etc.) via form mode
2. Clients **SHOULD** validate all responses against the provided schema
3. Servers **SHOULD** validate received data matches the requested schema

### URL Mode Security

Clients **MUST NOT** open a user agent (e.g. browser) without explicit consent from the user.

Clients **MUST** render the URL provided by the server in a browser which does not enable the client or LLM to inspect the content or user inputs.
For example, on iOS, [SFSafariViewController](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/safariservices/sfsafariviewcontroller) is good, but [WkWebView](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/webkit/wkwebview) is not.

#### Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)

Since clients facilitate the opening of URLs provided by servers, they **MUST** implement SSRF protections.

The following are recommendations for implementing SSRF protections. Clients that choose to relax these constraints should be aware of the risks.

> - Require the `https://` scheme for all URL mode URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

Reviewer 6: thanks. made this consistent

Typically identity verification is done by leveraging the [MCP authorization server](../basic/authorization) to identify the user, through a session cookie or equivalent in the browser.

For example, URL mode elicitation may be used to perform OAuth flows where the server acts as an OAuth client of another resource server. Without proper mitigation, the following phishing attack is possible:

1. A malicious user (Alice) connected to a benign server triggers an elicitation request
2. The benign server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client of a third-party authorization server
3. Alice's client displays the URL and asks for consent
4. Instead of clicking on the link, Alice tricks a victim user (Bob) of the same benign server into clicking it
5. Bob opens the link and completes the authorization, thinking they are authorizing their own connection to the benign server
6. The benign server receives a callback/redirect form the third-party authorization server, and assumes it's Alice's request
7. The tokens for the third-party server are bound to Alice's session and identity, instead of Bob's, resulting in an account takeover

> To prevent this attack, the server **MUST** check the identity of the user (step 6 in the above example), and confirm that the user who is completing the authorization is the same user who initiated the elicitation request.

Reviewer 15: This leaves a lot of interpretation to the implementors, on HOW to protect against such an attack. I think there is room here to simplify it with a standard approach. Since most MCP Servers would not have a stateful relationship with the user.

To illustrate the potential attack vector, let's consider both occur inside an Incognito mode. As in most cases there will be no cookies to the MCP Server. 

| Alice (Normal) | Bob (Victim) |
| --- | --- |
| MCP Client displays "https://example.com/authorize?..." | N/A |
| Browser Opens "https://example.com/authorize?..."  | Browser Opens "https://example.com/authorize?..."  | 
| Example.com AS presents Consent Prompt | Example.com AS presents Consent Prompt | 
| Alice accepts Consent | Bob accepts Consent |
| Example.com issues redirect to mcp-server/callback | Example.com issues redirect to mcp-server/callback | 

At this point the mcp-server, would not be able to securely verify weather Alice, or Bob is the user that started the transaction. Unless there is some form of session fixation, that occurs _before_ the the `example.com/authorize?` request is made, in which case an `HTTP-Cookie` would provide this when the `/callback?state=<>` is made. 

To protect against this attack, I would recommend that instead of the `example.com/authorize` the MCP Server should generate a url to itself, or a companion app (which can be co-located), where it can ensure the url, or obtain the same assurance via other means: 

```suggestion
To prevent this attack, the server **MUST** ensure that it binds the entire authorization transaction with the user, one way to achieve this would be to generate deep-link, url to itself, which initiates the redirect to the third party authorization server.
 
Such as `https://mcp-server.example.com/connect/example`, which must requires an authenticated session from the user to be present, and must belong to the same user that initiated this elicitation request. 

The server must ensure that the user that initiated the elicitation request is the same as the one that's being redirect to the third party identity provider, and check the identity of the user (step 6 in the above example), and confirm that the user who is completing the authorization is the same user who initiated the elicitation request.
```

The above pattern is how most "Connect" flows with OAuth 2 clients work today, either via a dashboard of connections, or via a deep-link. EG: Claude Desktop, or Slack. And allows the MCP Server, to leverage well established best practices on protected against CSRF / XSRF style attacks. 

IMO, these protections are very similar to OIDC Logout Endpoints, where instead of Signing the user Out by a redirect to `/oidc/logout` you'd prompt the user for consent if a valid `id_token_hint` is missing. 

However, this seems to becoming a lot more complex to codify in the protocol itself, perhaps the clarification language here could be to shorten the section on "OAuth 2 Elicitation" and instead refer to a sample that leverages the pattern described in-it above.

Reviewer 6: Agreed. Adopted this pattern in a non-normative example. There will be other ways that are required when the scenario is different. I think this could be a good area that the auth profiles can help bring clarity to so that this feature spec doesn't get too bogged down with all the variants. Will bring that up with the WG

  Best Practices document to understand why MCP servers cannot act as
  pass-through proxies.
</Note>

#### Implementation Pattern

When implementing downstream authorization via url elicitation:

1. The MCP server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client to the third-party service
2. The server creates a url elicitation request with this URL
3. The user completes the OAuth flow directly with the third-party authorization server
4. The third-party authorization server redirects back to the MCP server
5. The MCP server securely stores the third-party tokens, bound to the user's identity
6. Future MCP requests can leverage these stored tokens for API access to the third-party resource server

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant UserAgent as User Agent (Browser)
    participant 3AS as 3rd Party AS
    participant 3RS as 3rd Party RS
    participant Client as MCP Client
    participant Server as MCP Server

    Client->>Server: tools/call
    Note over Server: Needs 3rd-party authorization for user
    Note over Server: Store state (which user this auth flow is for)

>     Server->>Client: ElicitationRequired error<br> (mode: "url", url: "example.com/authorize?...")

Reviewer 16: Wouldn't the elicitation happen async to the tool call? IE wouldn't the tool call just be on hold while the elicitation happens?

    Note over Server: Confirm: redirect_uri belongs to MCP Server
    Note over Server: Confirm: elicitation matches user session<br>Confirm: user is logged into MCP Server or MCP AS
    Server->>3AS: Exchange authorization code for  OAuth tokens
    3AS->>Server: Grants tokens
    Note over Server: Bind tokens to MCP user identity
    Server-->>Client: elicitation/track response (optional)
    Client->>Server: Retry tools/call
    Note over Server: Retrieve token bound to user identity
    Server->>3RS: Call 3rd-party API
```

This pattern maintains clear security boundaries while enabling rich integrations with third-party services that require user authorization.

## Security Considerations

1. Clients **MUST** provide clear indication of which server is requesting information
2. Clients **SHOULD** implement user approval controls
3. Clients **SHOULD** allow users to decline elicitation requests at any time
4. Clients **SHOULD** implement rate limiting
5. Clients **SHOULD** present elicitation requests in a way that makes it clear what information is being requested and why
6. Servers **MUST** bind elicitation requests to the user's identity

> 

Reviewer 17: It would be useful to add a subsection for OAuth-specific security requirements. Here's a proposal:

One key thing is around loopback redirects -- we should allow http/localhost (i.e. `http://127.0.0.1:{port}`) for native apps while enforcing https for everything else.

```md
### OAuth-specific requirements
When a server uses `mode:"url"` to initiate an OAuth 2.x authorization flow, it
**MUST**:

* Generate a PKCE S-256 `code_challenge` and a cryptographically-strong `state` value, persist the corresponding `code_verifier`, and verify both on the token exchange.
* Bind the inbound request to its redirect URI to the same authenticated MCP user that triggered the elicitation.

Clients **MUST** refuse non-HTTPS URLs *except* loopback redirects that match`http://127.0.0.1:{port}/…` or `http://[::1]:{port}/…`, as permitted by [RFC 8252](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8252) 7.3 for native applications.

```

Author: > One key thing is around loopback redirects -- we should allow http/localhost (i.e. http://127.0.0.1:{port}) for native apps while enforcing https for everything else.

I can see a reason to add http/localhost for local-only servers (stdio transport). I'm having trouble imagining how a scenario with a native app would work, though. If a native app is interacting with a remote MCP server, wouldn't the remote MCP server still be playing the role of an OAuth client to a downstream service? Why would the native app be part of the callback flow?

> When a server uses `mode:"url"` to initiate an OAuth 2.x authorization flow, it **MUST**:
> * Generate a PKCE S-256 `code_challenge` and a cryptographically-strong `state` value, persist the corresponding `code_verifier`, and verify both on the token exchange.

I am a big proponent of PKCE and everything in OAuth 2.1, but I don't think this can be a MUST. Whether the flow can use PKCE is dependent on the third-party AS, not the MCP server. For example, Google's AS supports PKCE, but Slack's does not (yet).

Reviewer 18: Aside: Would it make sense to allow mobile links (app://, iOS custom URL schemes, etc) to support the mobile platform as well? It's entirely possible that the agent is coming from a mobile device, or that the MCP server has a mobile companion-app.

(That being said, they can use https:// links and deeplink primitive to accomplish the same thing.)

- **Decline**: Handle explicit decline (e.g., offer alternatives)
- **Cancel**: Handle dismissal (e.g., prompt again later)

## Implementation Considerations

### Statefulness

Most practical uses of elicitation require that the server maintain state about users:

- Whether required information has been collected (e.g., the user's display name via form elicitation)
- Status of resource access (e.g., API keys or a payment flow via url elicitation)

Servers implementing elicitation **MUST** securely associate this state with individual users following the guidelines in the [security best practices](../basic/security_best_practices) document. Specifically:

- State **MUST NOT** be associated with session IDs alone
- State storage **MUST** be protected against unauthorized access

> - When using remote communication, user identification **MUST** be derived from authenticated tokens acquired via [MCP authorization](../basic/authorization)

Reviewer: We can simplify this statement, like:

```suggestion
- For remote MCP servers, user identification **MUST** be derived from credentials acquired via [MCP authorization](../basic/authorization)
```

<Note>
  The examples in this section are non-normative and illustrate potential uses
  of elicitation. Implementers should adapt these patterns to their specific
  requirements while maintaining security best practices.
</Note>

### URL Elicitation for Sensitive Data

> For servers that interact with APIs requiring sensitive credentials (e.g. LLM APIs), url elicitation provides a secure mechanism for collecting API keys without exposing them to the MCP client or host application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For servers that interact with downstream APIs requiring sensitive information (e.g., credentials, payment information), URL elicitation provides a secure mechanism for users to provide this information without exposing it to the MCP client.
```

In this pattern:

> 1. The server directs users to a secure web page (served over HTTPS)

Reviewer: So looks like we want to limit this to HTTPS?

> 2. The page presents a branded form UI on a domain the user trusts

Reviewer: This might be a stretch - the server can redirect the user anywhere.

Reviewer 6: True, though the redirect would have had to come from a domain the user trusts. And when you trust a domain enough to open it in your browser, you're implicitly trusting pages it redirects to. Happy to cleanup this language if you think there's a better way to indicate that the user did consent to opening this page (and implicitly any redirects).

3. Users enter sensitive credentials directly into the secure form
4. The server stores credentials securely, bound to the user's identity
5. Subsequent MCP requests use these stored credentials for API access

This approach ensures that sensitive credentials never pass through the MCP client or any intermediate MCP servers, reducing the risk of exposure through client-side logging or other attack vectors.

### URL Elicitation for OAuth Flows

URL elicitation enables a pattern where MCP servers act as OAuth clients to third-party resource servers.

> The "downstream authorization" enabled by url elicitation is fundamentally separate from [MCP authorization](../basic/authorization).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authorization with downstream APIs enabled by URL elicitations is separate from [MCP authorization](../basic/authorization). MCP servers **MUST NOT** rely on URL elicitations to authorize users for themselves.
```

> <Note>

Reviewer: This feels repetitive with the rest of the document.

Author: I'll remove it and keep your suggested clarified language for the line above.

  This distinction is critical to understand. URL elicitation is *not* about
  authorizing (or re-authorizing) the MCP client to access the MCP server. It
  *can* be used to enable the MCP server to access third-party resources or APIs
  on behalf of the user, without exposing sensitive credentials or tokens to the
  MCP client.
</Note>

#### Understanding the Distinction

- **MCP Authorization**: Required OAuth flow between the MCP client and MCP server (covered in the [authorization specification](../basic/authorization))
- **Downstream Authorization**: Optional authorization between the MCP server and a third-party resource server, initiated via url elicitation

In downstream authorization, the server acts as both:

- An OAuth resource server (to the MCP client)
- An OAuth client (to the third-party resource server)

> Consider this hypothetical scenario:

Reviewer: Let's apply a bit more normative language:

```suggestion
Example scenario:
```

> - Claude Desktop (the MCP client) connects to Bob's Productivity Server (an HTTPS MCP server)

Reviewer: We can make this a bit more generic for spec purposes. Something like this:

1. MCP client connects to Example MCP Server
2. Example MCP Server uses downstream payment API that requires separate authorization
3. When MCP client invokes a tool from Example MCP Server that requires payment details, the MCP server needs to request payment API credentials

Reviewer 6: I noticed a lot of confusion when we used generic language and much better understanding with a specific example. But point taken, will make it a bit less specific.

- Bob's Productivity Server integrates with Dropbox and Google APIs
- When Claude calls a tool that requires Dropbox access, the MCP server needs Dropbox credentials

> The critical security requirements are:

Reviewer: This section would follow - let's make it more generic and not name any specific services.

1. **The Dropbox token MUST NOT transit through Claude Desktop**: The client must never see third-party credentials
2. **The MCP server MUST NOT use its Claude access token for Dropbox**: That would be [token passthrough](../basic/security_best_practices#token-passthrough), which is forbidden
3. **The user must authorize the MCP server directly**: The interaction happens outside the MCP protocol

> The tokens from these flows are never mixed or passed through. The MCP client's token is for the MCP server only, and the third-party tokens never leave the MCP server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Credentials obtained via URL elicitations are distinct from the MCP server credentials utilized by the MCP client. The MCP server does not transmit credentials obtained through URL elicitations to the MCP client.
```

<Note>

>   For more background, read the [token passthrough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For additional background, refer to the [token passthrough
```

  section](../basic/security_best_practices#token-passthrough) of the Security
  Best Practices document to understand why MCP servers cannot act as
  pass-through proxies.
</Note>

#### Implementation Pattern

> When implementing downstream authorization via url elicitation:

Reviewer: It's worth calling out that this is _one of_ the possible patterns. The server can also ask for API keys or other user details.

    Server-->>Client: elicitation/track response (optional)
    Client->>Server: Retry tools/call
    Note over Server: Retrieve token bound to user identity
    Server->>3RS: Call 3rd-party API
```

This pattern maintains clear security boundaries while enabling rich integrations with third-party services that require user authorization.

## Error Handling

Servers **SHOULD** return standard JSON-RPC errors for common failure cases:

- Unknown `elicitationId` in an `elicitation/track` request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- An `elicitationId` belonging to a different client in an `elicitation/track` request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- When a request cannot be processed until an elicitation is completed: `-32604` (ElicitationRequired)

Clients **SHOULD** return standard JSON-RPC errors for common failure cases:

- Server sends an `elicitation/create` request with a mode not declared in client capabilities: `-32602` (Invalid params)

## Security Considerations

1. Clients **MUST** provide clear indication of which server is requesting information
2. Clients **SHOULD** implement user approval controls
3. Clients **SHOULD** allow users to decline elicitation requests at any time

> 4. Clients **SHOULD** implement rate limiting

Reviewer: Clients or servers?

Author: Clients, because servers are "pushing" elicitation requests to the client.

This SHOULD was carried over unmodified from the current spec: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/blob/main/docs/specification/2025-06-18/client/elicitation.mdx?plain=1#L330

5. Clients **SHOULD** present elicitation requests in a way that makes it clear what information is being requested and why
6. Servers **MUST** bind elicitation requests to the user's identity

### Safe URL Handling

> Clients implementing url elicitation **MUST** handle URLs carefully to prevent users from unknowingly clicking malicious links.

Reviewer: It's worth explaining what "handle URLs carefully" entails here.

> 1. Servers **MUST NOT** include URLs in any message or schema fields as part of a form elicitation request.

Reviewer: Why not? This feels like an odd restriction. Does it mean I can't include a URL in an elicitation message?

Author: > Does it mean I can't include a URL in an elicitation message?

Correct, that's my intention here.

My thinking is: By saying that URLs _must_ only be present in the `url` field (not in `message`), clients can aggressively enforce it. A rogue server can of course send whatever message it wants, but a spec-compliant client can and should choose not to make the an extra URL in the message click-able, to further force the user to properly and knowingly consent to only clicking the elicited URL.

If you think that is too much of a stretch, I'm happy to adjust it.

2. Servers **MUST NOT** include URLs in any message or schema fields as part of an url elicitation request, except for the `url` field.

These requirements ensure that client implementations have clear rules about when to present a URL to the user, so that other rules about user consent and SSRF protection (below) can be consistently applied.

### Identifying the User

> Servers **MUST NOT** rely on client-provided user identification, as this can be forged.

Reviewer: What does this mean in practice?

Author: The server must not trust the user (or MCP client) saying "This is bill@microsoft.com". Only the AS can be trusted to identify the user.

Author: @ciamshrek You nailed it, the intent is precisely to communicate "never trust the client". We updated the language here.

Instead, servers **SHOULD** follow [security best practices](../basic/security_best_practices).

Non-normative examples:

- Incorrect: Treat user input like "I am joe@example.com" as authoritative

> - Correct: Rely on the [MCP authorization server](../basic/authorization) to identify the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Correct: Rely on [authorization](../basic/authorization) to identify the user
```

### Form Mode Security

1. Servers **MUST NOT** request sensitive information (passwords, API keys, etc.) via form mode
2. Clients **SHOULD** validate all responses against the provided schema
3. Servers **SHOULD** validate received data matches the requested schema

> ### URL Mode Security

Reviewer: We should call this "Security Risks" or align it better with the Authorization spec normative language.

Clients **MUST NOT** open a user agent (e.g. browser) without explicit consent from the user.

Clients **MUST** render the URL provided by the server in a browser which does not enable the client or LLM to inspect the content or user inputs.
For example, on iOS, [SFSafariViewController](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/safariservices/sfsafariviewcontroller) is good, but [WkWebView](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/webkit/wkwebview) is not.

#### Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)

Since clients facilitate the opening of URLs provided by servers, they **MUST** implement SSRF protections.

The following are recommendations for implementing SSRF protections. Servers that choose to relax these constraints should be aware of the risks.

- Require the `https://` scheme for all url mode URLs (no HTTP, `file://`, etc.)

> - Block requests to internal IP ranges (e.g., `127.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.0/8`, etc.)

Reviewer: Just internal or all IP addresses that are not FQDNs?

Reviewer 6: Pulled these recommendations from various places because I hate when specs say, "you MUST protect against this attack" but don't tell you how. This one was from [Protected Resource Metadata](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728#name-server-side-request-forgery). Happy to tweak these, but ultimately it's up to the application to determine the best course of action for their use case to prevent these types of attacks.

> - Clearly render or distinguish Unicode characters (e.g. punycode URLs) to avoid "look-alike" misdirections

Reviewer: Assuming this is a client restriction? The heading to this section makes it seem like this is for servers.

Author: You're right, this is client stuff. The heading was typo'ed, thanks!

- Clearly communicate the destination server and target URL to the user when asking for consent before opening the URL

Further recommendations can be found in the OWASP [SSRF Prevention Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Server_Side_Request_Forgery_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html).

#### Phishing

> URL elicitation returns a URL that an attacker can use to send to a victim. The MCP Server **MUST** verify the identity of the user who opens the URL before accepting information.

Reviewer: There is some missing information here. Returns URL to whom? How should the server verify the identity of the user who opened the URL?

Reviewer 15: Note: This IMO is incompatible with the current capability of MCP Resource Servers to be stacked.

> Typically identity verification is done by leveraging the [MCP authorization server](../basic/authorization) to identify the user, through a session cookie or equivalent in the browser.

Reviewer: I am not entirely clear how session cookies come into the mix here. This seems like a browser-specific construct when clients themselves might not be in a browser.

Reviewer 6: It's an example of how the identity might be determined. Doesn't need to be a cookie, but it's a common example when URLs are opened in a browser.

For example, url elicitation may be used to perform OAuth flows where the server acts as an OAuth client of another resource server. Without proper mitigation, the following phishing attack is possible:

1. A malicious user (Alice) connected to a benign server triggers an elicitation request
2. The benign server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client of a third-party authorization server
3. Alice's client displays the URL and asks for consent
4. Instead of clicking on the link, Alice tricks a victim user (Bob) of the same benign server into clicking it
5. Bob opens the link and completes the authorization, thinking they are authorizing their own connection to the benign server
6. The benign server receives a callback/redirect form the third-party authorization server, and assumes it's Alice's request
7. The tokens for the third-party server are bound to Alice's session and identity, instead of Bob's, resulting in an account takeover

> To prevent this attack, the server **MUST** check the identity of the user (step 6 in the above example), and confirm that the user who is completing the authorization is the same user who initiated the elicitation request.

Reviewer: Are we opening the can of worms here around state management and potential [session fixation](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Session_fixation)?

Reviewer 6: There may be stateful or stateless solutions here. However, it's important to call out this attack. It's not _necessarily_ enough for the MCP server to bind a third-party access token to the MCP Client's access token, the MCP session, or the specific connection being used from the MCP Client. There must be some guarantee of the same end user. 

Certainly, stateful servers and rigorous session management/security are one way to do this. But we didn't want to claim that, "just toss out an `/authorize` link in a url-elicitation for the third-party service and you're done!"

Credentials obtained via URL mode elicitation are distinct from the MCP server credentials used by the MCP client. The MCP server **MUST NOT** transmit credentials obtained through URL mode elicitation to the MCP client.

<Note>
  For additional background, refer to the [token passthrough
  section](../basic/security_best_practices#token-passthrough) of the Security
  Best Practices document to understand why MCP servers cannot act as
  pass-through proxies.
</Note>

#### Implementation Pattern

When implementing downstream authorization via URL mode elicitation:

1. The MCP server generates an authorization URL, acting as an OAuth client to the third-party service
2. The server creates a URL mode elicitation request with this URL
3. The user completes the OAuth flow directly with the third-party authorization server
4. The third-party authorization server redirects back to the MCP server
5. The MCP server securely stores the third-party tokens, bound to the user's identity

> 6. Future MCP requests can leverage these stored tokens for API access to the third-party resource server

Reviewer 14: to confirm, the access token here is tied with the user and MCP client pair, even though the server has access token for a given user, it cannot use the token for a different MCP client other than the one who facilitated the request for it?

Reviewer 6: @sandeepdhankhar

It's bound to the user identity, which may be the subject claim of the access token the client presented or some other mechanism. It can of course be bound to additional data if desired or prudent for the scenario, but it is not required in the general case to have client-specific binding for the access token received by the third party.

    Note over Server: Confirm: redirect_uri belongs to MCP Server
    Server->>3AS: Exchange authorization code for  OAuth tokens
    3AS->>Server: Grants tokens
    Note over Server: Bind tokens to MCP user identity
    Server-->>Client: elicitation/track response (optional)
    Client->>Server: Retry tools/call
    Note over Server: Retrieve token bound to user identity
    Server->>3RS: Call 3rd-party API
```

This pattern maintains clear security boundaries while enabling rich integrations with third-party services that require user authorization.

## Error Handling

Servers **MUST** return standard JSON-RPC errors for common failure cases:

- Unknown `elicitationId` in an `elicitation/track` request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- An `elicitationId` belonging to a different client in an `elicitation/track` request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- When a request cannot be processed until an elicitation is completed: `-32000` (ElicitationRequired)

Clients **MUST** return standard JSON-RPC errors for common failure cases:

- Server sends an `elicitation/create` request with a mode not declared in client capabilities: `-32602` (Invalid params)

## Security Considerations

> 1. Servers **MUST** bind elicitation requests to the user's identity

Reviewer 14: shouldn't the elicitation request be tied to the MCP client as well in addition to user's identity?

Reviewer 6: @sandeepdhankhar 

As discussed in two other threads, the access token received must be bound to the user identity. But you're correct that elicitation requests should be bound to the client for the purpose of tracking progress. I think we can clarify this wording.

### Identifying the User

Servers **MUST NOT** rely on client-provided user identification without server verification, as this can be forged.
Instead, servers **SHOULD** follow [security best practices](../basic/security_best_practices).

Non-normative examples:

- Incorrect: Treat user input like "I am joe@example.com" as authoritative
- Correct: Rely on [authorization](../basic/authorization) to identify the user

### Form Mode Security

1. Servers **MUST NOT** request sensitive information (passwords, API keys, etc.) via form mode
2. Clients **SHOULD** validate all responses against the provided schema
3. Servers **SHOULD** validate received data matches the requested schema

#### Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)

Since clients facilitate the opening of URLs provided by servers, they **MUST** implement SSRF protections.

The following are recommendations for implementing SSRF protections. Clients that choose to relax these constraints should be aware of the risks.

- Require the `https://` scheme for all URL mode URLs (no `http://`, `file://`, etc.)

> - Block requests to internal IP ranges (e.g., `127.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.0/8`, etc.)

Reviewer 7: Both of these basically say "stdio servers may never use url elicitation for local pages"

Imo this takes a very short view of url elicitation. This document is laser-focused on auth but that is by no means the only place this may be useful. A design MCP might pop open a paint tool in a new URL. An MCP that generates websites might use form elicitations to pop open the preview of the website locally. 

An MCP server with URL elicitation is no more dangerous than any random website that can redirect your browser to localhost/insecure pages. And signficantly _less_ dangerous because clients will get consent from a user before doing the navigation. Applications have long been told to use POST requests (among other things) to protect against SSRF, adding these two requirements to the MCP spec hamstrings its functionality for little gain in my view.

Reviewer 6: @connor4312 we got a significant amount of feedback here that we should outline specific "recommendations" for remote servers for how to protect against SSRF. As stdio servers do not care, they do not have to implement any of these recommendations. You can see that they are explicitly not marked as `**MUST**`s or even `**SHOULD**`s here because of that.

Reviewer 7: Right above this section it is stated that

> clients... **MUST** implement SSRF protections.

Followed by these recommendations. If these recommendations are not actually considered a MUST implement for clients, I suggest rewording this section.

Reviewer 6: Fair point. I think now that we link to OWASP, we can remove these recommendations here.

Reviewer: As we discussed on Discord, let's keep the STDIO clients a bit separate here - they can control entities within the environment that don't even require elicitation. A local app can just open the browser directly.

That being said, I am not even sure this is SSRF in its traditional sense - SSRF refers to a server being tricked into making requests to internal or otherwise unauthorized resources. In our case, we just present a URI to a client, and the client renders an affordance for the user to navigate to that URI. The user, not the server, is the one that is opening that URI.

I can see a scenario where a remote MCP server might do some work remotely, then help run some commands on the LLM locally with the help of prompts, and then elicit something like this:

"If you are running our product Y, go to `http://localhost/some/endpoint` and set up this configuration ID: `FOOBARBAZ`"

This would then spin up an elicitation, and it needs to support `http://`. Also, do keep in mind that even going to a URI like `https://example.com` can then redirect to a local scheme, so the scheme constraint could be bypassed.

Upon a bit more reflection, I really think the mitigations here boil down to:

1. **MUST** never automatically pre-fetch the URI or any of its metadata.
2. **MUST** never automatically open the URI.
3. **SHOULD** highlight the actual domain (helps avoid the `https://microsoft.com.example.com` trick)
4. **MUST** always show the full URI to the user (no trunctation or hiding behind a button, such as "Login Here").
5. **SHOULD** have warnings for ambiguous/suspicious URIs (i.e., containing Punycode).

@connor4312 @wdawson @nbarbettini @pcarleton thoughts on this reframing? I think this would be much more helpful than restricting the types of URIs in this context.

Reviewer 7: These changes lgtm, thank you for the discussion!

> - Block requests to internal IP ranges (e.g., `127.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.0/8`, etc.)

Reviewer 6: @connor4312 as stated in the other reply, these are recommendations and may not be appropriate for some cases. The key thing here is that clients and servers should do what is necessary to help protect against SSRF attacks.

> - Block requests to internal IP ranges (e.g., `127.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.0/8`, etc.)

Reviewer 7: That does not help me very much reading the spec as a client implentor. If some user has an MCP server that does want to Unifi or HASS, how does the client know whether it is 'appropriate' to block or not block the elicitation request?
